---
title: "Fonts" 
summary: "A list of fonts which I should use"
date: 2022-01-23
---

## Introduction

I've noticed that I often end up wasting a lot of time searching for the best
fonts I should use in my terminal and on web pages. This page will serve as a
reminder about which fonts I should use and, more importantly, which fonts I
shouldn't use and shouldn't spend time looking at anymore.

The fonts that I reject on this page are deceptively good. I'll explain what
that means later. This means that I'll only list fonts which I like and fonts
which I am tempted to like but end up rejecting each and every time I start
using them. I won't list fonts which I don't even consider worth looking at.
Obviously, there might be some good fonts out there which I haven't come
across.

I imagine this issue would sound alien to people who like using smartphones or
GNOME users but I really love how different fonts can evoke different feelings
when being read for hours, continuously. There is no "one true font".

## Selection Criteria

I guess it should obvious but font choices are probably subjective and won't
necessarily have an objective reason for not being used. Even so, I do think
there are some criteria that can be used to judge a font, especially monospace
fonts.

In the case of monospace fonts, the font should

- have a legible distinction among ambgiuous characters such as `0`, `O`, `o`
  and `1`, `l`, `I`
- some character combinations like `->`, `<-`, `!=`, `=>` `${}`, `()`, `[]`,
  `~` should be legible
- not enforce, promote, or encourage using ligatures instead of using fonts
  normally
- should look good on HighDPI screens and should not have been made with 96 DPI
  in mind
- not be a bitmap font

In the case of sans-serif fonts, I love the [Inter](https://rsms.me/inter/)
font. This has been my primary font for most of the hours that I spend on web
pages. I also like how the [Zen Maru
Gothic](https://fonts.google.com/specimen/Zen+Maru+Gothic) looks although it
doesn't look like this font is polished for usage on the desktop. It's somewhat
similar to News Gothic and its descendants. I guess I'll look for fonts
somewhat similar to how these fonts look like.

## Monospace Fonts

### Yes :thumbsup_tone3:

- [SF Mono](https://developer.apple.com/fonts/)

    This has been my primary font of choice for a long time now. This is an
    exemplar of how a monospace font should be. It's also free from the
    ligature bullshit.

### No :thumbsdown_tone3:

- [Iosevka](https://github.com/be5invis/iosevka)

    This is a one of a kind font with more than 13k stars as of Jan 2022. At
    face value, this looks like an ideal font because you can literally make
    your own font with your own preferences for character shapes. But, the end
    result has almost always been a disappointment, at least for me.

## Sans-Serif Fonts

### Yes :thumbsup_tone3:

- [Inter](https://rsms.me/inter/)

    This font combined with SF Mono is my favorite choice. I really love how
    simple and legible the characters are.

### No :thumbsdown_tone3:

- [IBM Plex Sans](https://www.ibm.com/plex/)

    I like the monospace variant of this font but I don't like how the IBM Plex
    Sans looks. It's a bit too condensed and vertically oriented for me than I
    like. For some reason, Plex Sans has also been deceptively good. It looks
    good at first sight but when I start using it, I get turned off.

- [Roboto](https://fonts.google.com/specimen/Roboto)

    This is well tested and kind of a workhorse font from Google, not unlike
    Noto, Droid Sans, DejaVu, and ChromeOS fonts which are metric compatible
    with their Microsoft counterparts. All of these, especially the Noto family
    of fonts, are awesome but I find them too bland and devoid of any character
    or distinguishing feature. They are probably a safe bet for documents and
    as "default options" for interfaces but I don't stick to them for long
    after applying them on my desktop.
